2 new WebDriver BiDi blog posts (#6035)
GoogleChrome/developer.chrome.com: site/en/blog/test-automation-evolution/index.md

---
layout: 'layouts/blog-post.njk'
title: "A look back in time: the evolution of test automation"
authors:
  - jecelynyeen
  - sadym
date: 2023-04-18
description: "A journey into the evolution of test automation on the web."
hero: 'image/dPDCek3EhZgLQPGtEG3y0fTn4v82/jGD1IO9UitBVPt7IsRol.jpg'
alt: ''
tags:
  - test-automation
  - devtools
---

## The birth of test automation

Let's rewind back to the 1990s when the web browser was born. Test automation didn't become a reality until the 2000s, with the emergence of [Selenium](https://www.selenium.dev/history/) and [WebDriver](https://www.selenium.dev/history/#:~:text=testing%20tool%20called-,WebDriver.,-It%20did%20not) projects to tackle cross-browser and multi-device testing challenges. 

> These two projects joined forces in 2011 as [Selenium WebDriver](https://www.selenium.dev/documentation/webdriver/) and became a [W3C standard](https://w3c.github.io/webdriver/) in 2018. We usually refer it as WebDriver or **WebDriver “Classic”**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These two projects joined forces in 2011 as [Selenium WebDriver](https://www.selenium.dev/documentation/webdriver/) and became a [W3C standard](https://w3c.github.io/webdriver/) in 2018. We usually refer to it as WebDriver or **WebDriver “Classic”**.
```

The two main automation protocols are **WebDriver “Classic”** and **Chrome DevTools Protocol (CDP)**.

In the next section, we will take a look at these two protocols to understand their strengths and limitations.

{% Img src="image/dPDCek3EhZgLQPGtEG3y0fTn4v82/Ils4VhvIba2mzo1HeXDC.png", alt="WebDriver Classic and CDP.", width="800", height="454" %}

## WebDriver "Classic" versus Chrome DevTools Protocol (CDP)

[WebDriver "Classic"](https://w3c.github.io/webdriver/) is a web standard supported by all major browsers. Automation scripts issue commands via HTTP requests to a driver server, which then communicates with browsers through internal, browser-specific protocols. 

While it has excellent cross-browser support and its APIs are designed for testing, it can be slow and does not support some low-level controls.

<figure>
{% Img src="image/dPDCek3EhZgLQPGtEG3y0fTn4v82/iIWQ1kEaZabrlHUoezJ0.png", alt="WebDriver 'Classic'.", width="800", height="343" %}
<figcaption>WebDriver “Classic”</figcaption>
</figure>

> For example, imagine you have a test script to click on an element `await coffee.click();` is translated into a series of HTTP requests.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, imagine you have a test script that clicks on an element `await coffee.click();` and is translated into a series of HTTP requests.
```
